The Joe Rogan experience. But, uh, I had a question for you right off the bat,
um, regarding Metformin,
there was actually an article I'm sure you saw it recently. Um,
like within the last couple of days,
that was going around through all the mainstream papers, it was, uh,
talking about how for the use of Metformin, uh,
DGA and w was there something else as well that was taking two years human
growth hormone taking two years to biological years off of people's lives in
terms of their, their age, which your natural eight would your actual I'm 52,
it would make me 50.
Right. Even 49.5 clinical study. That's what I'm looking for.
Yeah.
That was, that was good study. Uh, you know, it's only nine people,
so we have to repeat this.
Um, will they studs,
or did you get like nine super athletes or did you get like schmoes that don't
exercise?
Uh, I, as far as I know, these were just a regular Schmalz Shamar. Yeah.
Which is good news.
Yes. Good news. Yeah. I mean, that's what you want. You don't want, like,
some people just respond better. They're super bodies, you know.
Well, the great thing about that, uh, study is first of all,
I was with the first, uh, the main author on that paper, uh, while it came out,
I was over in Israel, uh, as part of my journey up the,
the great rift of Africa ended up in Israel. Anyway, the guy there, uh,
Steve Horvath is his name. Uh, he and I,
and a couple of other guys are trying to figure out, uh, not just why we age,
why we don't have to, but is aging, uh, truly reversible.
And that's what this study suggests is that it's not just about slowing down
aging, but one day we could be 80, but biologically 30.
Now, when we're talking about the biological age,
how is that measured? Is this measured by the length of the telomeres?
Is this measured by physical performance?
Is it measured by a combination of these factors?
It's none of that, no something brand new, most people don't know about it.
So it's called the Horvath clock.
And what Horvath and others have discovered is that if you read the DNA
and you don't just look at the letters, ACTG,
if you look at what's on the letter C sizing, it's called,
there are chemical modifications.
And those chemicals change as we get older in very linear and predictable
ways. If you use a computer AI, you can say,
if I took your blood sample right now, I could read your DNA,
look at those chemical groups on the seas. And I could say you are okay,
you're 52. You might be 46, according to that clock. Uh,
and also I could predict when you're going to die. Whoa, scary thought, right?
Yeah. Like a fortune teller. Yeah. But the good news is, well,
now that we know what's not just a measuring agent,
we actually think that clock is part of the aging process.
We're learning how to reverse it to, Hmm.
Now is this just one modality? This,
this combination of growth hormone is this one way of going
about it? Are there other ways of going about it? Growth hormone,
D H CA Metformin, is there anything else?
Well, that's the first that's ever been shown to those three things,
but I'm sure there's going to be many more discovered.
We've only had this Horvath clock over the last few years in humans, uh,
being used widely. Uh, but I think as we use this clock, uh,
we're going to figure out that whole bunch of stuff that we do and things that
we can do and combine will not just slow aging,
but reverse it and not just by two and a half years eventually.
And some of the technology that I talk about in my book,
we think could turn the clock back by a decade or more. Wow.
Now what things are you talking about that could possibly turn it back a decade
or more? Well, so the, and who do I have to blow? Sorry.
Uh.
Yeah, you can blow me. Yeah. You may have to do it a few times,
but, uh, the, uh,
the amazing thing about where we are now today with aging, um,
and we're right on the cutting edge.
So it's great to be able to share this with your listeners, is this clock it's,
uh, changes on the DNA, right? What I'm saying, uh,
in my theory of, uh, of aging is that it's not the DNA that we lose.
That's the old theory, you know, the old idea that anti-oxidants hurt the DNS.
Just throw that out for a while. Maybe forever.
What I think is going on is it's,
the DNA is getting modified and the cell can't read the DNA the way it
used to. Okay. That's really important. And so the clock is not just a clock,
it's not a clock on the wall. It's also,
if you move the hands of the clock time changes. That's what I think is.
Can we pause right here for a moment and explain what you were saying about
antioxidants?
Well, and toxins have been the biggest disappointment, uh, in the aging field.
Um, it doesn't stop, you know, 40 million people every day,
buying drinks with antioxidants in them,
but anti-oxidants have with very few exceptions failed to extend the
lifespan of any organism, but.
You are a proponent of resveratrol, at least you used to be, are you still.
We'll take it. Um, and we still study at my lab,
but what's you brought this up is really important.
Re virtual was originally thought to be an antioxidant and it is a mild
antioxidant, but the way it really works,
we know this is a fact from my lab is that it's stimulating the body's defenses
against aging and disease because it's,
it's binding to these enzymes that we work on called serotonins.
And these are the defenders of the body.
And you were saying that if I remember correctly, you take resveratrol,
you take powdered form,
actually bought exactly what you take and you mix it with yogurt in the morning.
Is that, is that how you do it? Yup. What's the dose that you take?
Well, probably comes out to about a gram.
And a gram. Yeah. Okay. So if someone's taking capsules.
What depends. If the probably capsules, a 250 milligrams,
that'd be four in the morning. Yeah. You know, I'm still alive, so that's good.
Oh.
Thank you. Do you, um, is it important to take it with fats?
Is that why you take it with yogurt?
Yeah. Yeah. Either high protein, which is, uh, you know, uh, Greek yogurt,
suffices, or fact, but water it's like brick dust. It won't dissolve and.
Just a glass of whole milk. Maybe it would be okay. That's great.
But it has to have something to bind to. Is that the deal for sure? Yeah.
Yeah. In, in our studies, in humans and in mice,
if we didn't give them high-fat food, it barely got in there.
Less. Now this study of Metformin,
D H E a N human growth hormone does not include an MN.
Right.
So, but NMN is also effective.
Ah, well, let's delve in a little bit, please, if you read the paper, uh,
and I have, uh,
it turns out one of the effects of this treatment was the reduction in the
levels of a protein called CD 38 CD 38 resides
on immune cells. And it goes up as we get older and what they found,
one of the biggest effects of the treatment was the levels of this city.
38 protein went down. So what is the CD 38?
This is the main enzyme in our bodies that degrades NAD NAD is required
for the sirtuin defenders to work. So one possibility is that, uh,
and I'm sure it's complicated,
but one way this could be working is by allowing your body to make NAD
and store it rather than degrading it as we get older.
Interesting. So would supplementing with
NMN, which is a form of NAD, correct? A precursor. Yeah. Precursor,
would that, uh, enhance the effects?
Do you believe like if they tried to do a new study, it could.
It could,
it could potentially each of these patients cost $10,000 for the treatment.
So it's, it's not easy to do these studies.
$10,000 For the entire T of the treatment and the treatment last, how long?
Um, I don't remember how long they treated the patients for. Uh,
but I do know that it's, wasn't shaped. That's why they only did nine.
Cause at first I said to my friend, Steve Horvath, nine patients,
you kidding me? Why didn't you do 50? And I went, well,
we didn't have the money. That's the, that's the, anyway,
my point really is that we need to test a lot of different combinations,
include animal and include a there's one called rapamycin,
which is a little bit more risky and toxic,
but there are better molecules in development.
The question is what is the best combination?
And do you use it with exercise and fasting? Um,
or is it bad to combine them all together? We don't know yet.
That's a good question, too,
that I wanted to ask you because one of the things that came out of the podcast
was input from some other people that I know that are nutrition experts and
performance experts that were skeptical about Metformin.
And they were saying that Metformin, although it may have, uh,
an anti-aging effect, it actually decreases physical performance in athletes.
Well that there is a study that shows that, uh, and raise virtual to actually,
uh, real can prevent the great gains from hot exercise.
So here's the solution, uh, that I think is worth trying a solution.
And that is a theme that, that I have in my book and in my, on my research.
And that is, we don't want to be doing everything every day, necessarily.
We want to pulse it. We want to shock the body and let it recover.
We know that you can't just exercise. I mean,
some people who've been on this show run a hundred miles every, every weekend,
but generally you want to hit it hard and let it recover, hit at Huddler com.
So what I am planning to do and actually started doing is on days that I'm
exercising and recovering, I don't take Metformin.
And then when I'm just sitting around on a plane, I do.
And that way I think that my body can have the best of both worlds.
So when you are not exercising and you take it,
you feel like it doesn't have a hit when you are exercising and not taking it.
So it somehow, or another whatever performance had has it's temporary.
Yeah. Right. So, well.
This is all just theoretical.
It is we're right on the cutting edge of human knowledge.
We don't actually know what the best thing is, but my,
my best guess is that we want to allow the body to recover.
So I don't take Metformin on those days, rather than taking Metformin everyday,
like a diabetic would.
[Inaudible]. And what does
, what is the, what's the hit, like what is happening? What's the mechanism behind the performance hit from taking Metformin?
Oh, we don't know, but I can tell you the best, uh,
explanation that I can give you.
So Metformin is a derivative of a plant molecule, the French lilac.
So it's not crazy molecule. It's pretty natural,
but what it does is many things in the body.
Scientists will quite annoyingly argue about it for, for,
to have for the past 40 years. Um, so there's no correct answer.
But what I think is going on is that Metformin is interfering with the
mitochondria mitochondria in the cell, mitochondria the,
we call them battery packs. They basically making chemical energy.
Without that chemical energy, we'd be dead in about 20 seconds.
So we need that for life.
So Metformin interrupts that energy production in the mitochondria, uh,
but you need the mitochondria to amplify after you've exercised. So they're,
they're antagonizing each other.
So why does Metformin work by inhibiting the mitochondria?
The body gets a signal that it doesn't have enough chemical energy.
It's not making enough. So it expands the number of mitochondria.
These are ancient remnants of bacteria that entered ourselves.
And we have less, if we sit around and like we are now,
and we have more free exercise and Metformin by telling the body, uh,
we're running out of energy, the body responds and makes more mitochondria,
just like exercise does.
But I think if you're taking Metformin and exercising,
that inhibition is preventing the benefit somehow of what you get with exercise.
Perhaps preventing your house. So like what, what did the study,
or what studies have been done? What did they reveal?
Uh, I don't remember the precise details of the study. It was,
it was giving Metformin every day to people who were, uh,
in controlled exercise, I think was treadmill, um, a few times a week.
Uh, but then what they measured was the mitochondrial benefit now that, uh,
and I think they measured a bit of strength.
Fusing that there's a Mito mitochondrial benefit, but a performance hit.
Well, no, they actually Metformin prevented the mitochondria from amplifying up.
Oh, all right. So then it must be, uh,
interfering with the signal that you get from exercise, whatever that is.
We don't know exactly what that is.
So you'd really have to be some sort of a Guinea pig to try to with this stuff,
to go back and forth from taking it and exercising, not taking it.
Yeah.
And exercise. And I'm one of those.